[Music]
you strike me as somebody who is very
even keel very sweet-natured what what's
an example of a toxic emotion you've
held on to guilts as like a parent or a
hundred percent as a parent yeah I mean
the biggest turning points in my life
was when my son got sick and when he was
6 months old that is why I do what I do
today so you know first child suddenly
at six months has a convulsion we not
sure he's gonna make it through the
night we're in a foreign Hospital in
France it turns out that he had a
preventable vitamin deficiency that
nearly killed him there's a huge rabbit
hole there but just that is the summary
of what happened I as a you know
externally you would call me a highly
qualified doctor I've got my physician
exams for being a specialist I've got my
general practitioner exams I've got an
immunology degree with all of my
training with all the prestigious places
I went to train right it didn't mean
anything because I wasn't able to
prevent my son from nearly dying from a
preventable vitamin deficiency right so
what happens I feel guilty right I feel
right I now I'm gonna get my son back to
optimal health as if this had never
happened that was the challenge I saw
doubts myself
sure modern medicine saved his life in
the acute phase but the chronic impacts
of it was a vitamin D issue so I was
thinking what if my son has had no
vitamin D for his whole life and while
he was in the womb and that's a critical
nutrient for a immune system to develop
what impact has that had is that why he
has such bad eczema is that why he has
allergies etc etc so I felt so guilty
and that guilt drove me to actually find
out how to get him fully better I'm very
very lucky to say he's a happy thriving
nine year old boy today
super well super healthy this led me on
this path which I am on today that has
given me this
drive and this mission to go out and try
and help as many people as possible but
that gilts whilst it drove me to get
where I've got see it also had an
unintended consequence which is you know
I wasn't showing up as a father in the
best way that I could he doesn't need
his father's be guilty he doesn't need
me to hold on to this sort of baggage
that was affecting how I was parenting
you know I I would have my own emotional
baggage I would probably be overly
focused on him and in the last yeah 18
months that is start to go I don't have
that guilt what do they talk about the
book like what what's the trick to
letting go
there is no trick man there's no hack to
it it is a long process of
self-reflection but reading about
emotions reading about examples of where
they might come from and how they can
impact someone that helps to shine a
light on yourself you can oh I recognize
that trait in myself sometimes awareness
is all that takes sometimes you are
living a life that you think this is
your personality why people say this is
how I am well that a minute I realize
now that I didn't know how I was I
didn't know what what I thought my
personality was is not my personality
it was simply what I had absorbed over
my life and I was responding to what I'd
absorbed now that I understand that and
I started to peel away those layers I no
longer had the guilt right various
addictive tendencies that I may have had
in my life right I don't really have
them anymore that's not because I've
tried to address them that's because as
I feel I guess as I feel freer in myself
I no longer need to numb you if you come
across gabble masses work never heard
those syllables put together before you
would say look in love Gabor maté a
gabbo gabbo GA bo AR got it ma se ma te
okay I'm surprised because I think you
would love his work and his whole he's a
psycho well he's actually a GP but he's
like one of the world's leading
addiction specialists he's worked with
you know drug addicts in downtown
Vancouver really really deprived area
and he looks at addiction as he says all
addiction whether it's drugs alcohol
sugar sex shopping come down to the same
thing and in his language he would say
it's down to childhood trauma and he
defines trauma as being either a bad
thing has happened to you or not enough
good things have happened right it's a
really simplistic way of looking at it
but I think there's real merit to his
view and he's got a lot of experience
and looking at it this way and I really
resonate with that and I think what it
comes down to tom is this whole idea
that if we don't feel whole in ourselves
right if we feel that there's a bit
missing we will you know we were try to
fill that with other things you know
whether it's sugar
whether it's booze whether it's shopping
we will use other things to give us that
buzz and as we feel more complete and
this is what how I feel I'm going on
this journey as I start to understand
myself and let go of these negative
emotions
I just feel those compensated behaviors
have no longer adopted not because I'm
actively trying not to do them but
because it's no longer serving me and
then you take it back to something super
simplistic like as a doctor how many
people are trying to quit sugar right
and you can tell them how bad sugar is
for them right or too much sugar I
should say and they can use willpower to
get them to a certain points but I find
it's never really a few people for sure
managed to do it that way but most
people that do it for two weeks for
three weeks but unless the underlying
drive behind it if the underlying stress
that caused it in the first place is
gets addressed they're gonna flip back
to the same behavior same with booze and
alcohol and so I guess why I like that
book so much is because I think coming
across that book has coincided with me
going down this path of emotional growth
I don't if you had put that book in my
hand five years ago I probably would
have put it right back to and I probably
have had a look
get this all right now you're gonna have
to tell me what primed you to be open to
that because this is probably the thing
that frustrates me the most in life is
that you can't want it for somebody and
I say that in response to this because
when I look at people that really are
struggling to make that change there's
some loop some patterns some mental pain
hole wound trauma something fear
limitation blocker wound to use
screenwriting language that they have
that until they're able to pierce that
veil and realize that they have that and
in fact I'll use microbiome language to
really make it medical for a second so
when the microbiome gets into dysbiosis
you get some of the microbes end up
getting covered in that the film I
forget what it's called exactly and it
basically makes it impossible to get rid
of them because anything that you're
trying to use is an agent you know
eradicate them just hits that that
coating that they have on them and is
unable to penetrate to get to them and
so you can give people all the amazing
advice in the world and they have this
biofilm around their mindset and you
cannot get to them and with but then
like it you're alluding to here
oftentimes there's one thing some thing
that happens either the death of their
father or something else that pierces
through that biofilm and now they have
access to actually change and my mission
in life is to figure out how to pierce
that so that they can hear it so that
they can understand for their own
reasons either letting it go or
recognizing the because I think
sometimes it's it might be there's a
guilt or something like that and
sometimes it's just not understanding
the way the mind works and understanding
how to build things like desire or
self-love or self-worth or that your
beliefs are malleable or your values
invaluable all of that stuff just simply
not recognizing that that kind of stuff
is true so you have these two things one
you can't pierce the veil they have a
belief or there's something that I think
basically the trauma creates a world
view that is impenetrable and then on
the other side of that then it's do they
actually understand once they penetrated
it do they actually understand how to
make the change I think you might go by
my knowledge
is so freaking good honestly it's it's
such a such a great way of looking at
that problem which is this you know when
we see it we want to help all those
people around us those close to us Hey
Hey look if you only just do this it
never works
very rarely words I also think about
this a lot one of the things I ponder
the most I would say is what causes
people to change you know
does a human being need to come across
significant adversity in order to start
looking at things and start to shake
their foundations and start to go on
that journey of change I've heard you
talk about this as I have with a good
friend of both of ours rich a rich role
and you know rich will talk about that
whole incident where yeah he needed that
pain he needed that adversity to go on
that journey and in many ways it's a
tragedy worthy isn't it because we don't
really want everyone to have to go
through that level of suffering before
they start to go on that growth journey
but then is there any other way is that
necessary in some way I really want to
believe that there is and I I actually
like everything I think it is so highly
variable so that yes some people
absolutely have to hit rock bottom and
other people can do it faster other
people's rock bottom is more shallow
than other people here's here's what
bothers me in in this space that I'm
deeply in and you're maybe a more
professional like qualified version of
like the self-help universe is you get
people who talk like there is no human
tragedy there's [__] human tragedy
man and there are people that they not
only do they not escape but the kids
don't escape it and their parents didn't
escape and their grandparents didn't
escape and it's just cycle after
unending cycle of people who are unable
to figure out how to get control of
their own internal experience and thusly
their internal experience borders on
torture it is a level of self cruelty
that you would never like subject upon
someone that you love but you certainly
subject upon yourself I think it comes
down to awareness tell like but I don't
want to let go of this the know
[__] rock bottom like is there
another way I want there to be another
way yes so badly
I think it's awareness right I think one
component here is awareness and let me
explain what I mean by that so my
contention is that many of us including
myself particularly in the past maybe
I'm still doing it on certain things and
walking around unconscious to what is
really going on like I think the way I
am now is it's just imply the way I am
this is my personality now one option is
to hit adversity right where something
so tragic something so painful happens
these sorts of look at things in a
different way
right but this and this is what drives
me in my work that I do in the books
that I write in my podcast this is what
drives me I think it's storytelling my
storytelling Rewa were an alignment
there yeah but stories having is
arguably the most powerful way to impact
people so do you mean self narrative or
do you mean stories books TV shows
movies
I mean self narrative I mean telling
people's stories on your like what you
do on this show what you do on your
YouTube channel what I do on my podcast
right you talk to people and if let's
say you're talking to someone who has
gone through that journey and they
shared their emotions and as they
reflect how they act in certain
situations people will hear that and
they will go hey wait a minute you know
that's me actually in that situation hey
hey like today that someone might go you
know what I'm that person who doesn't
own his name and feels like I don't want
to offend people so maybe they don't
need to wait for them to get sick or one
of their parents to die maybe somebody
will listen to that ago wait a minute
and now he's free from that and okay I'm
gonna go down that road I'm gonna start
that process awareness is key right
awareness is absolutely key because most
of us are in my view we are unaware we
are walking around with the blindfolds
on in terms of what is really going on
and just to be clear I am not
criticizing people I was that person but
when you can see the light when you can
see what truly is going on I think
that's
dance this long period growth I don't
think it's quick I don't think is easy I
think it's a hard journey to go down but
I think it's the most fulfilling journey
to go down so yes I think there's
another way
I don't you necessarily need adversity
although I think it helps and I guess
this is what challenges me as a father
right one of the big things that
challenges me is this I feel that I have
grown and learnt things about myself
more from the difficult things that
happen in my life than the good things
no question so then the question is as a
parent you want to protect your kids you
want them to have great experiences but
I also know that it's the bad stuff that
can shape us how do you do this this is
I don't know about this is the reasons I
don't have kids
yeah like when I stop and think about
what makes for an extraordinary human
being it is an unending parade of
[__] misery that that person somehow
overcomes now here's the problem the
misery breaks most of the people that it
touches so like when I think about life
man the school of hard knocks the school
of hard knocks kicks the [__] out of
most people and they never recover and
they never do anything interesting and
their life is is a certain level of
suffering and some people though are
able to internalize that and go whoa
there's something really powerful here
I'm gonna learn from this I'm going to
grow and I'm going to I'm going to get
better and I really want to believe that
there's this awareness now around growth
mindset that is really shifting a tide
and that enough people are growing up
and they're not falling prey to that
trap because we're hearing about it and
you talked about your mission being born
of your son and it while mine is clearly
not born of my son I have a mission that
fills me with an equal amount of passion
which is I want to make sure that nobody
reaches adulthood without encountering a
growth mindset like just to know that it
exists and for me growing up I didn't
know that it existed so I didn't have a
mental model it's like Roger Bannister
in the four-minute mile until you know
that it's possible like you just you you
can't conceptualize it but this is the
point of trying to make some about
awareness awareness is key
and if you are unaware you can't make
those changes if you don't know what
growth mindset is you know how can you
develop one right and I think I do think
things are shifting in the world I do
think there is a growing one and support
this stuff I think the Internet is a big
part of that you know we are sharing
ideas now you've got this platform I've
got a platform we're sharing these ideas
people will hear this stuff and it is
changing their lives you will get
messages just as I do on your DMS in
terms of oh man I heard that last
interview I get it now I've you know
I've done a B and C now in my life
because of that isn't that the most
awesome thing in the world on an
individual level that we get to touch
people by sharing these stories the the
thing I would come back to is if I think
about those episodes that I have
recorded like with with Gabor maté say
for example that is quite poignant it is
quite if you are not ready for it it can
rub you up the wrong way so why how Wow
so what happens right what does he say
what I think he's one of the most
compassionate human beings I've come
across so I don't see how necessarily
can rub somebody up the wrong way but if
you are so entrapped with your own
stories right if you cannot see how that
said if you have an identity that is
built up around being a certain way it
can be too challenging is he saying like
start playing the victim
what are his you know what are the
things that would rub somebody the wrong
way but any addictive tendency you have
is rooted in childhood trauma that is a
pretty controversial statement for a lot
of people having said that he and I
think the word shows what people want to
say this is a genetic disorder yeah or
they want to say you know my childhood
was great I had a great childhood what
you mean trauma yeah nothing bad has
happened to me but the way he displays
it the way he explains it is I think
there's real compassion there and I I
saw him speak live in London the day
before I interviewed him and he
basically at the end of his talk he
asked the audience does anybody here
think that they have got an addiction
that was not rooted in child a trauma
right
on the edge of my seat right let's
search a few people put a hand out it
took a while but no there's a couple of
hands go up so he went to someone at the
front and he said look before we go down
this path are you open to sharing and
you open something asking you a few
questions there front in this audience
she goes yeah no problem really
confident yeah yeah no problem and so he
goes so how was your childhood really
with the goods were you loved by your
parents absolutely right really kind of
110 percent answers my childhood it was
great
anyway he kept probing away this took 2
minutes maximum
and then it turned out that he decided
asking about her relationship with her
parents and then she said yeah yeah I
guess you know my parents were so in
love I often felt that I was a spare
part and I was getting in the way and
the whole audience you could tell we all
took a like a deep breath I mean it was
so clear from the outside and bingo and
so he honed in on that and he made a
supposition that maybe your various
addictions may be the way you are now is
born out of that experience where you
feel that you are getting in the way
that actually you are a burden on your
parents you're getting in the way of
their love he did it in such a
masterfully beautifully
compassionate way white and she did turn
around and she did accept it and she did
start to you could tell the tone of her
voice changed she what was happening she
was being shown awareness he gave her
bad awareness now I don't know what's
happened to her I don't know she's gone
down that journey oh uh Ronnie and I
want to follow up with this woman I need
to know where she's at man
yes the this kind of thing is is like
okay when people have a breakthrough
like that are they able to transform
that into something that is permanent so
when you think about like habit
formation so this is where I often butt
heads with people that take and entirely
would all call spiritual or woowoo
approach to making real change in your
life breakthroughs like that are
extraordinary but if that because they
give you the awareness they now she has
a framework with which to re-evaluate
her
life and maybe the wound that she is
seeking to fill with the addiction or
whatever okay super helpful now moving
forward how what is the process for
making sure that somebody then goes down
the path of gaining the understanding of
how to make the actual changes that you
want in life because normally what
happens is a psychological immune system
kicks in she's now feeling raw and
vulnerable she does not like that
feeling and when there's not the sort of
hype and in fact I would be surprised if
she didn't later have I don't I don't
know her but one potential yeah one
potential sort of response that would be
either the family's like what are you
crazy and then she's like yeah maybe
that was crazy or she wakes up in the
middle of the night and is like oh my
god I can't believe that whole audience
thinks that my parents didn't love me
because they loved each other so much
and like begins to unwind this I have
seen that so many times where you think
oh my god this person has had this
amazing transformational breakthrough
but they simply can not be open to the
fact that there is they're doing
something wrong it is hot I wish I could
give you a simple answer and say oh no
you do a B and C and you will be okay it
is hard because I think this lady was
maybe I'm gonna guess late 40s early 50s
that is many years of developing these
shields around her developing these
behavioral patterns right I think
awareness is key is awareness enough I
don't know where this is enough I don't
think everyone with awareness will do
something with it but I think without
awareness you've got very little if not
zero chance how do you give people who
don't want to work out to start working
out you so simplicity that's one of your
tricks you've told the story of the
couple in their 60s that started doing
the work out at the top of the stairs
and all that and then they started a
good memory like seven days a week and
yeah so how do you make that stuff stick
or do you just tell everybody and some
people do and some done now I
personalize my approach depending on who
the person is I try and find so
one-on-one it's easier than clearly if
you're trying to deal with a lot of
people or trying to give a message
that's gonna work for a whole population
one on one I will listen very very
carefully to what a patient is telling
me I will pick up
I would try and pick up on these
nonverbal signals what is that pain
point what is that trigger point what
matters to them and then I will try and
frame the next steps around that do you
do move towards techniques or move away
meaning you don't want to die of heart
disease or you want to look good in that
bikini I can't I don't want to evade the
question but it did was no because I
found one thing you know how long have I
been seeing patients for now nearly 20
years right there is no one right way
that works for every single person so
where I think the lifestyle gets so
important is sometimes and you mentioned
that couple in their 60s who do this now
this ten minute strength bodyweight
workout every night while their bath
runs upstairs we've spoken at this
before why is that so important it is
not them going on this huge personal
self growth journey but what it is it's
starting to help them get in tune with
their bodies what it's helping to
develop a bit of self awareness and
without that self-awareness you are
never gonna get their rights so I think
sometimes even these small steps that
people take ah they're sort to show
themselves a bit of self-respect the
starlings to help themselves feel
complete oh I can do this I didn't think
that I was good enough to strength train
I didn't think I was the kind of person
who could work out well hold on a minute
now you've been doing it every day for
six months hey I'm the person I'm the
kind of person who works out you know I
feel good like I've got more energy I
can see the tone on my body improve this
feels great
what else can I achieve so this is what
I'm so passionate about small things do
make a difference
small things when don't consistently
lead to bigger and bigger things and so
I think it is possible for everyone to
grow and everyone to make change but I
think the path by which you get there is
different for everyone
and look I if you think about a graph
for me to go on this journey I've had
dips along the way I have at times when
I thought you know it is hey if you go
on this journey and your other half does
not that is hugely challenging I'm very
my wife is on her journey like I am on
my journey and we have got this deep
commitment that we are committed to self
growth ourselves and we're committed to
be together as well even if sometimes it
makes it challenging because if one of
you is changing at a different rate
compared to the other one
it can what do you do when you're in
that circumstance this is so interesting
to me what do you do I'm a lot better at
dealing with in the health and I was a
few years ago that's for sure
hey a few years ago it would lead to
rouse right we were just for the u.s.
audience arguments yeah it would yeah we
it would blow up and you know because
somebody's feeling judged yeah someone's
feeling judged and one thing I've
learned on all this stuff is when we're
judging someone else we're really
judging ourself and again these things
sounds super spiritual no no no right
this is money I think this is genuinely
what I think is ultimately the key to
good health if I'm honest if I'm truly
honest relationships specifically
growing growing as a person
understanding who you are right finding
out who you are without all the
programming from everyone around you I
think it's the only journey worth taking
if you ask me what is the point of life
right because I reflect on this a lot I
think the point of life is simply to
figure out who you are I don't wish you
on that yes so wish away you brought
this up earlier you default to the words
figure out who you are but then you once
followed it up by saying and change
elements if you want to me it isn't
necessarily that interesting to find out
who you are other than to know where the
starting line is and then to me it's a
question of who do you want to become
like what do you want to develop what
aspects of your personality do you
respect what aspects of your personality
do not respect and then be able to
change and shape those accordingly do
you see it like that or do you see it as
no no this is about recognizing an
immutable truth about who you are and at
least now you know I think it's both
because I think what it is is it's the
process of understanding who you are I
think leads to all the gold in life
right I think it leads to the
I think it leads to you achieving things
why do you say that that does not sound
true to me why does it not sound true
because I think most people don't have
passion and I think clearing out their
head of all other people's judgments
about things that they may like and all
that will be tremendously beneficial but
to me passion seems to be the result of
a process it does not seem to be an
archaeological dig it is it's about
building something it's architecture so
when I think about like every time
you've said it in this interview because
one time you said and then you can make
changes if you want I've just sort of
said all right I'll assume he means as
like a starting line a starting line a
starting line but discovering who you
are
implies an intrinsic immutable nature
and I think that who you are is based on
yes for sure your wiring we are not
blank slates I do not think that I'm
[__] fascinated by Steven Pinker's
book blank slate which basically hammers
home the fact that we come with a whole
lot of wiring so hey fair enough
there is some amount of like your
personality just gonna be different you
have two kids right two kids so I'm sure
they're very different in temperament
and one yeah so every parent says that
me and my sister oh my god for all the
things that we have in common like we
are very different people
so I fully understand that there's a
certain amount of hardwiring and and as
a starting point for my sister to
understand how she's gonna react to
certain things and for me to understand
how I'm gonna react to certain things is
very beneficial as a starting line but
then going beyond that I think that
there are the one constant of the human
animal is our ability to adapt so now my
question just becomes for anybody like
who do you want to become like if you
understand how the mind can change if
you don't have a passion which is
probably the number one question that I
get asked don't panic you can develop
one if you don't like an aspect of your
personality you can change it you talked
earlier about identity I think a lot of
this comes down to you were saying that
I'm the type of person who works out you
know I didn't think I was but here I am
I've been doing it for six months
like that's all grabbing ahold of your
ID
identity and saying I like the staircase
example could have just as easily gone
no no no we're gonna practice everyday
you're gonna come and see me in for an
hour we're gonna talk about what a
badass you are in the gym but I'm not
gonna let you work out you're going to
imagine you're gonna visualize you're
gonna tell me what a badass you are you
gonna go tell other people and then a
month later I'm gonna let you actually
go in the gym and then I think that that
person well certainly won't be
guaranteed I think they're more likely
to have success because they've done
other work in their their identity their
mindset their belief system their values
all of that but that's all malleable it
is malleable I guess what I'm saying is
that because I feel that many of us are
walking around unconscious we don't
actually know what our true passion is
let's say you do things you think it's
everyone has a true passion that's lying
dormant no I'm not saying that what I'm
saying is this if you don't know who you
truly are what you think your passion or
you know but things you like doing your
hobby is to be someone that might be we
may just I may be misunderstanding your
definition so when you say who you are
what does that mean so I am clearly
influenced in my conversation at the
moment because I'm going through a lot
at the moments right so I'm going
through this path so I'm constantly
shifting like if we have this
conversation six months ago it would be
different from the way we're having it
today right so things are changing all
the time
so things in your identity beliefs
values yes who I am I mean I can share
some of those things with you what is
even change on this trip to LA for
example right so I feel that as the
week's go by I am understanding more
about Who I am and therefore the
decisions I am taking on now different
what I used to think was a passion is no
longer a passion I give an example yes
please why I used to be a huge football
or soccer fan okay so you know I grew up
in South Manchester right soccer is the
predominant game in the UK it is the
national sports rights
my older brother supported Manchester
United so I rebelled against that and I
supported Liverpool now when I say
support it let's be really clear I was
upset
I went to the games I would check all
the transfer speculation seven days a
week if we lost I would get upset when I
was old enough to and I was earning
money I would fly around Europe to watch
Liverpool play right if I was at a
friend's wedding
a Liverpool player I would want to sneak
out see if I could catch some of it
let's put that in perspective I was
all-in with football my friends would
have said what water wrong dunes hobbies
man he loves football he loves Liverpool
Football Club why fast-forward now where
I don't pay attention to anything that
is going on in football now what's going
on there what's going on there cuz I've
thought about this a lot I think that
what happens like many teenagers you
were trying to fit in right I can only
express my own experience being an
immigrant living living in an immigrant
family in the UK where I've got an
Indian culture at home I want to go to
school all my friends all my buddies
have a Western culture so you kind of
almost have these two personalities your
home personality and your school
personality right so I think that I
developed this passion for football has
a way of fitting in as a way of defining
who I was it was my identity I'm a
Liverpool Football Club fan I get upset
when we lose I'm gonna show you how much
I care about this team right
what's happened over the last few years
I don't give two hoots anymore what
happens now that was a gradual process
in the sense that as I started to find
myself as I sought to strip away the
layers as I saw it's become calm and
more at peace with who I am actually I
no longer had that desire anymore I'm
not trying to please other people
replaced by something like did you
suddenly realize I've actually always
been into video games swimming basket
weaving
I think there's multiple things that
could be going on here this has also
clashed with me being a parent right so
my time has suddenly got limited in a
way that it wasn't before and my view
now is that you know
so busy as is everybody do I want to
spend my free time watching 22 people on
a pitch play and start to raise my
stress level to something I have zero
control over I don't want to hang out
with my kids or go for a walk with my
wife or do something for me so I think
that's one component I don't think could
have indoctrinated them and made it like
a whole big thing for you and your kids
it's interesting I have Eddie so my son
does not support the same team as me
right and my friends like did you walk
it how have you allowed this happen I
said hey you know what I don't want to
program my son to all the stuff that I
I've done it's chant this journey has
changed the way I parent I feel I'm a
karma I feel I'm a less judgmental
parent now then possibly I was before I
feel I'm in a much better way able from
my chair my child my children to express
themselves the way they want to express
themselves have they said anything know
that do you think they notice are they
too young what my son is now getting to
that age where all his bodies are into
soccer so now we're talking about it and
I am trying to get back into it so I can
interact with my son but we I just I'm
just not interested right so when I say
you will start to find your passions
rights what I mean by that is and I
guess we're looking at passion from a
slightly different perspective I'm
simply saying that if you don't fully
know who you are okay I think it's very
hard to know what it is you truly wants
so I get so much satisfaction these days
like I love my life right I don't mean
that to sound like a dick right I say
that because I generally do like I love
the career I've got I love the fact that
I get to help people that I get to write
books record podcasts with really cool
people so I get a lot of growth from it
but then I also get to share this thing
and help inspire hundreds of thousands
of people I love it right so I would you
say I've replaced following a football
team for having a career that I'm super
stoked about I'm not sure it's that
straightforward that I've replaced it
with something else
I just feel now I'm not trying to be
someone who I'm not anymore
I don't think I am anyway I feel and now
more in touch with actually what it is I
once liked what it is you know I I'm not
into this whole third-person piece where
you how you talk about it so but like
how one might talk about themselves I'm
thinking but you know what does wrong
and Chatterjee once right not what does
he think he wants and so I was not what
you think you want or not what you think
you should want both both you know you
ever have an ease around football like
was it a thing real like oh god I've
kind of backed myself into a corner but
why the [__] am i flying to see this
team unease
I wouldn't say about that I remember in
2007 so in 2005 Liverpool got to the
Champions League final I flew to
Istanbul for the day from the UK to
watch it it was you know regarded as one
of the best fighters of all time
Louisville with three nil down at
halftime thought they were done you know
the whole crowd starts singing inspires
a team they come back two three all them
went on penalties at that time that was
probably the best moment in my entire
life at that time well it's three to two
years later in 2007 we are also in the
final again I flight with my same buddy
to Athens for the day to watch the final
what happens I'm sitting in the
Liverpool section with my buddy and
things are not going well
Liverpool are losing suddenly this group
of guys turn around and start screaming
racist abuse at me randomly yeah you
know I'm not gonna repeat what they said
and it focused that's so crazy your own
support here I suppose I had my shirt on
I was with my buddy who's a Caucasian
guy you know to the point where we both
got super uncomfortable so and I had
never ever had that at a football game
before and so that could also be a
slight trigger of a start of the end of
my love affair with football because I
thought I'd have examined I thought
isn't this interesting when things are
going well when the teams are winning
everything's great but as soon as people
start to get frustrated they sort of
take it out on people so I didn't like
the way that made me feel for sure we
moved into a different part of the arena
so
I don't think I've ever experienced any
negativity apart from that if I'm honest
so I have not tried to stop watching
football it just no longer fits with
where I'm at at the moment so and that
feels to you like you're discovering who
you really are versus just evolving well
I think discovering who you really are
is evolving you know maybe you could
clarify what do you mean by that exactly
I think what I'm saying is I look at us
like we are a chemical processing plant
that shifts and changes how it responds
to its environment based on its
environment so if you grow up as an
immigrant in a foreign country then
you're going to have a very different
frame of reference than you would if you
didn't grow up in an immigrant family so
that's one way that you have a frame of
reference if you're not loved as a child
that creates another frame of reference
if you're bullied that creates a frame
of reference if you grow up or a frame
of reference rich frame of reference so
all of these things give you a different
perspective with which to view the world
now none of them are the real you
there's no real you oh you grew up rich
and that's the real you there's no grew
up poor and that's the real you but I
think those people would come out very
different so we were talking about how
kids are wildly impacted by adversity
okay so is that kid fundamentally
themselves when they're facing adversity
or fundamentally themselves if they're
not facing adversity I don't think there
is sort of a fundamental self I think
that there are we come with wiring
everybody is different I think you do
have sort of a baseline personality I
think it would be useful to understand
like where you're going to struggle
versus somebody else for instance I find
it while I am introverted I find it very
easy to put on my extroverted hat so I'm
an ambivert now other people my sister
for instance is wildly extroverted so it
is like useful for us to know sort of
our what we're like in our idling state
but when I think about even what I was
like 10 years ago it's rad
different than I am now but back then
felt back then I would say was
authentically me but there were problems
that I had not addressed yet and now I
feel like I'm authentically me but for
sure I'm better than I was ten years ago
in terms of my ability to stay
emotionally calm and centered things
that I'm pursuing or different and ten
years from now I will be radically
different but I don't believe any of
them were me laboring under a false
sense of identity even though some
states were suboptimal in terms of my
ability to enjoy my life I think my
journey was absolutely defined by false
states of identity and I guess that's
where this passion about this comes from
is because I can now reflect back and go
yeah sure that felt authentic to me at
the time I didn't feel I was faking it
right I didn't I thought that was me and
you could argue right and I probably
can't disagree that on one level is this
just a natural consequence of getting
older right is this just what happens as
you develop more life experience I'm not
convinced it is because I think you can
grow older become wiser change you know
not be as reactive in your 40s as you
are on your twenties you know a bit more
chilled about things sure I think that
happens to a lot of people but I do
think that's when we stop looking for
answers externally when we start going
internally I think we start to figure
out you know who we are like and there
are many potentially there are many
versions of who you are right maybe it's
not just one thing maybe you can go down
this path and come up with lots of
different conclusions I don't know I'm
still on the journey right so I don't
know if we do this chart in two years
maybe I've got something different to
share but at the moment and I've got to
say if I take it back to the
consultation room with patients rights
because there's one thing I've got a lot
of experience then tens of thousands of
patients over many many years yes I'm a
huge fan of lifestyle change for sure
but I think that lifestyle change can be
very limited for people can be very
challenging for some people because
there's underlying issues that are
unresolved and I find the people who
really get true freedom from their
health complaints often
I'm not saying always right because it's
a Redell icky area but generally I find
that they have taken their mindset has
shifted on some level they have started
to change certain patterns in their
thinking right that can happen many ways
you took a lot about mindsets right
can you consciously just change your
mindset potentially rights but I think
if you're consciously always trying to
change something they're potentially
still a slight tension there because
you're consciously trying to do it I
have found that when you strip away
these layers those changes often happen
without you even trying without even
trying to consciously change my mind
sets those things move away so I've
always been a perfectionist you're you
would consider me to be a perfectionist
I don't really think I have anymore
you know III certainly have that
tendency it's not because I'm no longer
trying to be a perfectionist but by
doing the inner work I no longer feel
the need that everything I do has to be
perfect that I can't put anything out
into the world until every little thing
has been checked so I think there are
many ways to get there but you follow
what I'm saying I'm not convinced that
it always has to be a conscious process
this is very intriguing to me and I
disagree I think I do right but here is
the I I'm not yet sure how much it
matters because you're obviously working
your way to a beautiful place and so I
want to say that all of my words are
predicated on it's entirely possible
this is just semantics it's entirely
possible that people listening at home
are saying oh my god you guys basically
agree and you're just missing this one
variable well I know that we will get so
through yeah no doubt we'll find out we
will here yeah I don't think that's the
case I think that you're coming at it
from a fundamental place of what you
just said which is you believe in this
stripping away and I believe in the
building up or changing so I think that
like when I
here actually I won't tell you what I
think do you think kids exist in this
sort of idyllic state that the world
twists and tuck sissified or I think
that's I think that's too binary I think
there is some pre-program and it comes
in I think we know there's a lot of
science were on epigenetic imprinting
but actually the stress from our
ancestors the stress from our parents
can absolutely be programmed in and can
change the way that we react to stress
the way we look at things in our own
life so I think there is a certain
amount of pre programming that comes for
sure
but I also do think which is relatively
obvious on some level that the
environment hugely shapes what then
happens okay so that we agree on
radically so I think that for sure
there's a mixture of genetics
epigenetics environment so I think that
the human animal is born to respond to
its environment that is what it does now
if you think about the responses to the
environment being a shaping of the
personality I don't see where the sort
of true personality comes in now if you
say hey people have given you beliefs
that don't serve you then I would say
please define don't serve you
I will postulate put forward I think
postulate is correct I will put forward
that what is going on is you have
beliefs about the world beliefs about
yourself that lead you to a
neurochemical e disadvantaged state
meaning you just don't feel good
something feels off something doesn't
feel right whatever
that's why I was asking like did you
have a sense of unease about the
football because I've been around people
that love sports in a way that I do not
so I'm on the outside I'm looking in and
I think that's really interesting you're
you're having a surrogate experience
that takes you on this neurochemical
roller coaster that is very similar to
actually being out on the field playing
now I think somebody out in the field
playing nobody would say oh that doesn't
make any sense why do they care about it
I mean you could say that about almost
any job that isn't like an MD where
there's actual real life-and-death
consequence
is we hold athletes up as a celebration
of human potential realized so I think
there is this desire to feel like you're
a part of a team to belong to something
to seek victory to feel attached and
like that victory is yours when they win
to feel the pain of defeat when they
lose to have this communal sense of
ownership over that experience I think
all of that is innate to the human so
when people say that they're really
passionate about sports I say yeah that
makes a lot of sense in terms of having
a surrogate experience rather than
actually playing it yourself you're into
it so to me loving it and then
eventually not loving it is simply
you're moving through like a continuum
continuum of the human experience not
that oh this was it was born of a desire
to fit in I get that and I get how in
that context your makeup as a human
being is telling you not even that a
better way of saying it you were
designed to conform to your environment
to survive that's what [__] shoes do
so you're born into that particular
environment of course you're going to do
things that fit in to fit in and when
you grow and change and your life
changes in your environment changes it
it makes sense to me that your likes and
dislikes are going to change now
why do I press this point the reason
that I press this point the reason that
I think that it makes sense to stop and
differentiate between the two world
views is people listening right now I
want them to understand everything about
your worldview everything about your
identity everything about your values
and beliefs it's all made up and it is a
random artifact of that is what humans
do and that is the environment into
which you were born and so trying so I'm
literally writing a book about this
right now and I was trying to like
explain to people how do I get them to
buy instantly into the fact that you are
malleable man you are so malleable
I'll give me one more somatic about no
that's fine so you've got if I take a
kid and raise them in America or I take
that same and let's make it nice and
juicy I take a girl and I raise her in
America or I take
same girl and a razor in Afghanistan
they are going to be very different
outcomes now there will be certain
things you would recognize if they were
twin separated at birth like there would
be certain things that they recognize
but their value systems would be
unimaginably different and when you
think about that that the same person
and you just raise them in different
cultures and they have different
cultural beliefs to the point where
people go to war over the religions that
they happen to be born into so it's like
yo if you can shape somebody's worldview
to the point where they would kill
and/or die for that belief simply based
on where they were raised how they were
indoctrinated it's like what sort of
natural state are we trying to get
people back to that that presupposes in
my estimation that kids are born perfect
and the world then sort of torments them
and my thing is kids are born as an
adaptation machine and they're
essentially dumb and the culture fills
them up right they can't even take care
of themselves it they would get eaten
and so when I hear people talking about
like a six year old and look at the way
they [__] color and they get so into
it like I get it as a way for us to
think about being in flow and to let go
of the judgments and all that but there
is yet to be a six year old without a
brain disorder that doesn't take in the
input from their culture and morph and
change to fit in and to pay attention
and to think about how they work in the
world and not work in the world in fact
the kid that just colors and is totally
divorced from the world around them and
is in a constant state of flow we would
say they're autistic so it's like I
don't think there is like oh you're born
with this sort of innate beauty and
goodness for being a human and then it
gets all [__] up it does in some cases
get all [__] up because you get the
wrong identities beliefs values blah
blah blah but it's like the goal is to
go not that I need to revert to some
pure state it's oh I see beliefs are
malleable values of malleable identities
malleable I need to change them into
something that serves me and gives me
what I will shorthand to fulfillment
some I don't think I disagree with you
right I don't think actually what we're
saying is as different as it potentially
sounds so I agree he was invaluable I
also agreed
we have various belief systems that will
depend on where we are right and those
belief systems often will serve us at
that time so me feeling to take one
incident where as a 12 year old boy I
don't feel as though I fit in what I
have morphed I have adapted so that I do
fit in you could make a case that that
was fully appropriate I did the right
thing
so that I belonged to a community right
you can make that case maybe that served
me to a points maybe the evolution is
simply that it no longer serves me
there's a slight unease in my life after
my father died with the time that I had
to self-reflect there was unease in my
life that is also what drove me to try
to figure this stuff out it's like why
is this like unease and what I'm doing
why is that dis-ease and what I am doing
so I agree it is evolution it is trying
to find out which behaviors which
identities that you have created because
I do also agree with you that it isn't
our heads we create these identities we
can just as easily if we choose to
create a different one rights I don't
think what we're saying is as dissimilar
as potentially I'm not saying you're
trying to make out because I think it's
I think it's a I think it's a valuable
dive in it's super interesting for me to
try and figure this out girl actually
it's what we're saying is different as
it might sound or is it actually the
same thing my mindset is changing right
maybe it's my I think I've always had a
growth mindset I think I've always been
driven to do the best at everything I do
to be as good as I can so maybe that
mindset when I suddenly had the time
right post my dad when I suddenly had
the time then I had the time to actually
go there is something not quite right
here I am always striving to learn I'm
always trying to get better I want to
get better at being me right that is the
journey I've been on and the way I have
found to do that is to strip away layers
is to peel away at layers of the onion
and so when I say to find out who the
real me is
maybe the real me living in the UK
traveling for a week's promo in LA maybe
this is the me that serves me in this
environment
maybe if I lived in Afghanistan my
journey to find out who the real me
would be would actually be a different
version of me because I would have to
find than me I was comfortable with in
that environment so I actually think
there is similarity to what we're saying
but I guess maybe I'm articulating in a
slightly different way from how you
would articulate it if it is about tools
that we can pick up if it is about
changing our mindset let's say we've got
lots of compensations conversations okay
I can I can I can frame that better if
we've got lots of behaviors that have
been appropriate responses to the
experiences we've had but we work on our
mindset we take some of the tools that
you're teaching all the time to work on
our mindsets as we do that I think the
natural consequence of that will be that
we will start to re-examine some of our
belief systems so I think there are many
paths to get to the same place and I
don't think it's one or the other I
think people will figure out what works
for them I'm sharing very openly my
journey I have seen this also work for
many many patients I've looked after
people with chronic chronic health
complaints and when their mindset shares
when they start to see some of the
programming that they've had to view the
world a certain way and when that starts
to shift and they see where that has
come from then I see this truly
wonderful growth and I think I'm
influenced by my own experience I'm
influenced by seeing patients and what I
find works in real life the people who
were struggling now you also have
experience you also you know you share
your rules the rules that you have there
what you feel about mindsets I think
there are many ways to get to that peak
what what is that place that place is
where we feel we feel good we have that
innocence of calm we're very console
with what we're doing in the world with
who we are when we like where we fit in
we know where we fit into the world
around us to that particular environment
which we currently resides you know if I
move as I've said already if I moved to
Mexico right maybe the way I am would
have to change again maybe the real me
in Mexico is the different real me from
Manchester
I believe that there are fundamental
similarities that will be there you know
I feel I worry that like as adults we
don't have the level of like fundamental
change that we would as a kid I am I am
this is something people that listen to
me have heard me say many times I'm
deeply distressed by how much of our
imprinting happens when we were young
and so like as you're talking about that
and you're talking about would the real
you be different in Mexico probably not
I mean like the the so if I were to step
to your position but use language that I
understand better maybe the right way to
say it because I think you're right like
I can feel that this if we were
functionally to like work in the same
space that I don't think there would be
much difference in terms of how we
perceive it but I think we would explain
things very differently great when I
think about the truth of what you're
saying what I think too is the
importance of stillness the importance
of silence the ability to what I'll just
round to meditation and how powerful
that is when there's no noise when
you're not judging yourself when you're
not allowing other people's judgments to
cloud your vision to have the awareness
of your own emotional your internal
emotional States so that you can really
begin to suss out what you respond to so
I'll say that a passion for me I don't
think is uncovered but I do think it
begins as an interest and if you can't
hear that interest because you're
shutting it down and you're saying oh I
shouldn't be interested in that or
whatever then certainly people are never
able to discover that they're never able
to I was gonna bring this up earlier
biofeedback is something that at one
point in my life ended up being insanely
powerful because I could not internally
get in touch with a certain part of my
mid-back and it was causing all kinds of
problems when I lifted weights and so I
went to see a physiotherapist and he
said
though you have the these two parts of
your mid-back they're just insanely weak
compared to the rest your back and he
was like here try to fire it he was
touching it I was like I don't know what
you're talking about dude it feels so
weird and so he put these biofeedback
devices on my back so that when I fired
the muscle it would beep and when I
began I couldn't fire it and it was
basically silent and then by I don't
know whatever two months later or
something I could make them sounded like
a machine gun going off and it was so
crazy to see how by getting that
external feedback because I couldn't for
whatever reason I couldn't get it
internally by getting the external
feedback then I was able to find the
connection inside and that ended up
being incredibly powerful so people that
aren't able to hear themselves they
aren't able to get to that point to
learn to do that what I think you're
calling stripping away the layers of
other people's influence or at least
having the awareness of how you
developed a belief so that if you know
ah this belief was developed because I
wanted to fit in
ah my obsession with football actually
began with something else okay now I
have this sort of awareness path of how
these things became hardwired do I want
to change them and if I do at least now
seeing their construction you can't
unsee it and so now once you see it as a
construction then you can really begin
to make the change like I get that's me
using my own language but you've just
you've just the phrase which really
gotta three there is when you see that
it is a construction then you can start
to unconstructed right right I think
fundamentally that is what we are both
talking about hundred percent we're
talking about awareness and just as the
environment shapes us your upbringing
your experience in business the people
you interact with will probably shape
the way you have found to articulate
that my own experience me you know I'm
not in business I have my job as seen
people where they come in with problems
so I have developed a way to explain
this to people in a language that I feel
and I have seen resonate with them right
so maybe it's your background you know I
don't want to be overly simplistic but
maybe it's you've got a business
background I don't I've got a seen
patients background so maybe the way
we're gonna articulate these ideas
is inherently going to be different
because we have got different language
and different experiences through which
we are trying to explain this because I
don't think you know as you're
describing the way you see it I'm sort
of an agreement right maybe I'm not
particularly good at explaining no no
you're great and I certainly don't want
this to be this versus that it it is but
it is a construction man that's the
point it is a construction yes you can
strip everything away and say the story
goes like this my dad died I now have
time with that time I started to
self-reflect I realized that many of the
things many of my behaviors were
constructed behaviors once you see it
you cannot unsee it now that I've seen
it I'm gonna start stripping them away
that is the way I would summarize the
whole journey it can be that simple
now how you unconstructive a it's how
you decides once you have that awareness
to start building a new identity if
that's what you want or new beliefs new
idea you know new beliefs this is
whatever is that I believe there are
multiple ways to get there I think there
are so many different tools and
techniques people can use you know you
know people can read a book and they can
read like your lessons and they go right
I'm gonna apply this framework in my
life for many people that will get them
there speaking of books let's talk about
the stress solution what made you want
to write this particular book I've heard
a phrase that authors often write the
books that they need to write for
themselves and I think there's a very
very strong case for that the the reason
that I think I wrote the book is a it's
out of these four pillars that I talk
about food movement sleep and relaxation
the relaxation piece is the one I
struggle with it's the piece that when I
was promoting my first book and going
around the country and abroad talking
about this people would say that is the
pillar I struggle with the most so
consistently I was hearing that this
stress
is what people are struggling with and I
wrote the book because I felt that when
we talk about health and well-being
I think diet and movement gets all the
attention right I think it usurps all
the press column inches all the books
it's all about food and movements now
those are clearly important I am NOT for
one minute saying they are not important
but I think potentially we have over
emphasized those at the expense of
chronic unrelenting stress the stress
can be a very toxic word you have to
define what you mean by it you know what
stress itself is a toxic word I think
for some people like it's a Trier
because they feel guilty I don't
understand that yeah a lot of you don't
like the words that they don't want to
be I want to mean by that is I talk to
word in the sense that I don't want to
hear about stress I don't think I am
stress the amount of patients for
example who I have seen where you try
and bring up the word stress it comes up
with a barrier straightaway
yeah I'm not stressed you know stress is
not an issue oh I understand what you're
saying but that doesn't affect me I'm
totally cool with my life right and so I
think the word stress in itself can be
problematic for some people but just to
put this in perspective Tom the World
Health Organization calls stress the
health epidemic of the 21st century
right that is now on their website even
today the health epidemic of the 21st
century I think that is a pretty
remarkable statement from a very big
global organization research suggests
that up to 90% of what a dots are like
me sees in any given day is in some way
related to stress the thing I found so
capture captivating in the book is the
part about relationships that was the
part I didn't expect talk to me about
that talk to me about some of your views
on I think I'm getting pretty close to a
paraphrase quote here that sex doesn't
even necessarily have to be about
romance and I've got to imagine you get
some pushback on that so one what is the
talk to me a little bit about some of
the declining sex rates you've talked
about the increase in virginity do you
know about Japan what about Japan there
they have the lowest fertility rate of
any industrialized nation in history and
that they have like 10 percent I think
virginity rates in the mid-30s which is
crazy
they're expecting in the next century
for their population of Japan to get cut
in half
current rate this anyone speculates it
what is going on well it reminded me so
much of what you write about in the book
that yes so there's part of it is
technology part of it is stress crazy
great I mean Japan is like famous for
people working until they die at their
death I know so
I'll chalk it up to that technology
cultural differences yeah I didn't know
about this in Japan okay that's the news
your book is so on point with it so even
just going off of what you talked about
the book you're you're right on the
money
look there are many things that can
cause infertility there are many things
that can cause a low libido right but to
really simplify this what is your stress
response there to do right so to keep
you safe it gets activated when you
perceive that you are in danger okay
your listeners will know what this 2
million years ago you're when you're
hunter-gatherer tribe you're getting
about going about your business a wild
Predator is approaching suddenly in an
instant your stress response gets
activated right various things happen in
your body your blood sugar goes up so
more glucose can get to your brain your
amygdala your emotional brain goes onto
high alerts so that you are hype and
vigilant for all the threats around you
okay
that is an appropriate response your
blood pressure goes up appropriate
response your blood becomes prone to
clotting so that if that lion attacks
you you don't bleed to death that is
fundamentally what your stress response
is there to do right problem now is that
it's our lives that are activating our
stress response not wild predators and
that I think we understand but as well
as the things that it prioritizes when
you're in danger when you are stressed
what are the things that switches off
well it switches off your digestion
which is
the main reasons why so many first 80%
of the UK population in any given year
have a digestive complaints right 80%
80% the last survey said 80% and again
we always talk about food on talk about
digestion and clearly that is the
components but I contend that stress is
a bigger component than food when it
comes to digestive disturbances I have
patients who many patients now complain
that they are intolerant to certain
foods right gone and they are you know
they have a reaction when they eat a
certain foods I've coming back to libido
in a minute this is a slightly
roundabout way of getting there but you
do say we do long for hey hey there's
this so that's so I have found in the
last few years that somebody who
actually is reacting to a certain foods
it is not the food so when I have taught
them about the stress response and
taught them how that they can switch it
off before they eat it's tell me because
this almost certainly is something Lisa
struggles with and we'll get back to
libido what can I say yeah but I found
now that a certain section of my patient
population no longer react to the foods
that they previously they're them do it
is simple like everything I recommend in
the book it is simple right we've
overcomplicated this whole industry
around wellness and health and stress
breathing right it's simply I've got a
multiple load of breathing techniques as
a breathing menu in the book I get
people to choose one but the one I like
a lot that my patients seem to really
respond well to it was something I call
the 3 4 5 breath when you breathe in for
3 you hold for 4 and you breathe out for
5 now to do that one cycle takes 12
seconds you do that 5 times it takes one
minute many of my patients I have them
do that for one minute before they eat
so this is to try and break the cycle
off us and going at 100 miles an hour
sending our emails sending our texts oh
I've got to eat I'm gonna buy my healthy
whole food organic lunch but I'm gonna
eat it whilst I'm also getting back to
these emails and I'm hey man I do this
right I am NOT kritis
I'm saying when people do this I am
Society people hate you with that a lot
well the like I'm not criticizing yeah
because I've said it so many times in a
sense whew yes I was a [__]
criticized for you want to help for sure
but yeah wouldn't be - well people are
doing stuff that's [__] them up I
would say that this is still a hangover
from these behavioral patterns and
identities and I'm trying to shake off
right about not wanting to offend my
right wanting to be the one who actually
everyone likes right I can be honest
about this I think I'm hoping if we have
this chat in two years time I'm not
doing that anymore you know grab there
might be like all right [__]
this is gonna be but if I'm if I'm
completely honest this is this is
probably something I'm not quite managed
to let go yet right so yeah but it I
have notes as I've said that quite a lot
today I don't want people and also it is
also comes from a place of compassion
where I know that these tools are gonna
help people because I see it day in day
out so I would like people not to think
oh you are you're whiter than white what
you want you never actually eat your
healthy lunch whilst also sending emails
do you know what I mean I might know I
am human I do it as well just cuz I know
what one should we didn't this I mean I
always do it but to come back to it what
I've seen with patients is sometimes
patients who feel that they are
suffering and are intolerant to a
certain food what I've realized is by
doing that before they eat by slowing
down before they eat by shutting the
laptop go to a different room actually
changing the way that they're thinking
suddenly they're no longer reacting to
the same food and man I've only figured
this out in the last couple of years
right so this has been a revelation to
me that oh man in the past I was asking
them to eliminate that food for a while
now I still do need to do that sometimes
but I'm figuring out wait a minute it
makes sense when you look at
fundamentally what the stress response
is if you are stressed right and your
stress will be different from my stress
you will switch off digestion it is not
essential to survival therefore maybe
that is why you're out into that food if
you can activate if you can switch off
stress response promote relaxation
there's suddenly maybe you're not gonna
react to the same food it could be a
five-minute walk right it could be that
Lee said before she eats and again I
don't know the ins and outs of what's
going on but maybe it is not going
straight from work to food maybe it's
about going outside for five minutes
chilling out hey what did the French do
right what a French Dip they're known
for their long lunches right it is not
you do not by and large and I spoke to
some meal from Paris we say in the urban
settings and offices as there's an
international workforce coming in things
are started to change but still it is a
core part of French culture we don't
mess around with a lunch break his lunch
break
write book down pen down we are chilling
now are we all going to enjoy our lunch
right there is this whole thing called
the French paradox why can the French
apparently eat so many what we would
consider unhealthy foods yet apparently
not suffer from the consequences I think
more and more this is a big part of
picture
I think the way they eat is as important
as what they eat and I don't feel that
we in the West take that seriously
enough we talk about food but Scott what
are you eating I'm not yeah I'm gonna
hold your feet to the fire for a second
I think earlier you said it's more
important than what they so if you had
to rank order them I know you don't want
to but you're gonna push me I'm gonna
push you what or how which is which has
a really yeah wow if you pushed me now
yeah how I view myself and how I view
this today from what I've seen in my
clinical practice I actually now believe
that how you eat is just more important
Wow you eat so let's and we are not
you're pushing me yeah yeah no look I
think both reports are important I'm not
saying be chilled out any junk food
right you can have a Snickers as long as
you relax no I get that so if somebody
we're gonna do it like just absolutely
perfect way what would a meal look like
they sit down they do the three four
five breathing for a minute yeah a
little minute if that if that floats
your boat if that appeals to you and I
appreciate it it doesn't so everyone
easy
you is more important than anything yet
because that is the patient population I
see
busy people with busy lives who tell me
they don't have time to do all this
fancy one whether somebody's I'm asking
for a friend
what if somebody's super diehard and
they're willing to do whatever what
would be the I would say you wanna you
know the system has two states stress
taking the relaxed I just say no very
very simplistically you want to make
sure you're eating in a relaxed States
right how you do that depends on how
much stress you've accumulated in the
morning what's going on in your life but
a very simple tool would be have some
form of switch something where you [__]
you shift from work mode to relaxation
mode you go for a walk for five minutes
do something like moving is that a
critical component or anything that gets
you relaxed anything that gets you
relaxed right anything that actively
relaxes you so I think breathing is one
of the best I think
genuinely think that breathing is
possibly the ultimate health hack
breathing in a particular bringing in it
breathing consciously not breathing as
you know we all can breathe we are all
breathing without our conscious control
as an autonomic process but the way we
breathe is information for our brain
into the nose out through the mouth and
ear that matter for sure what I mean let
me just explain why I think breathing so
important if you are busy Tom right I
know you seem a super chilled guys to me
so I don't know what they're like yeah I
mean you could be intense yes right but
I think you seem pretty relaxed and
chilled but then I'm in your house as
well so I mean you know I'm in your
kingdom as it were we we could really
derail on this it actually be fun for me
to articulate but I don't we saw begun
by to libidos
okay this is that so let's say you're
busy okay let's say a friend if you're
okay is busy and they've got a lot of
deadlines and they've got a lot of
things they're juggling almost certainly
without them realizing it's their
breeding pattern will change they will
start to breathe a little bit faster a
little bit more shallowly they will
start to breathe less from their
diaphragm and more from their chest okay
these things will happen without them
even
realizing it okay what is that doing as
you start to breathe faster as you start
to breathe more shallowly you are
sending messages to your brain
effectively saying I am in danger okay
things are not good and you start to
this it's a self-fulfilling prophecy if
that activates your stress response that
causes you to breathe faster and faster
again and you basically have this cycle
going on now the beautiful thing is you
can hack that very simply because if you
slowly and consciously control and slow
down your breathing right you can send
information to your brain hey
everything's calm everything's good I am
NOT in danger it can be that simple your
breath instantaneously will change your
physiology will change your biology yet
because we can do it without thinking
about say we walk around each day not
practicing our breathing so to pull
something else in from this conversation
from the start when you're talking about
my morning routine I said I used to last
year for four or five months I was using
the calm meditation app I do not do that
currently what I am currently doing
because I've done some breathing work a
lot the summer I've been learning some
pranayama practices I will do five or
ten minutes of breathing in the morning
now as my mindfulness you said pranayama
probably helmet it's a it's a it's an
Indian it's what a breathing practice is
called
in yoga okay what what makes it
different or how would you define it
necessarily makes it different I just
think people have been doing this for
thousands of thousands of years they
have recognized that that breath is very
powerful so what is it into the nose up
to the mouth diaphragm most of the ones
I've been working on are in through
their nose and out through the mouth
okay there are various different
protocols there is you know there's a
particular type of breath where you're
breathing very very fast from your
abdomen there's a whole series of
different breaths and actually one thing
I've been learning recently is that
different people respond differently to
the same breath so actually again
without I know people want what is the
white breath to do what should I go and
do now if you want that I would say
start with a three four five breathe in
practice in through the nose and out
through the nose start there I think
that's the optimal way to start and see
how you go but there are plenty of stuff
online to start looking at different
breathing practices different techniques
and you can start figuring out what
works for you there is alternate nostril
breathing are you familiar with that I
get it from the words but no yeah again
this all comes from yoga I'm not
claiming any of this is new there is a
way off where you breathe in through one
nostril you'll then switch your breathe
out through the other nostril then
you'll breathe back in through that
nostril and breathe out through then
also that you first read them through
that is a very common practice I will
sometimes use that before I go to bed
what do you get from that what do you
get from that it is
I feel really chilled and relaxed and
there were than if you did into the nose
out through the mouth
more than if I do in through the nose
and out through the mouth so in the gym
I'm trying to figure out this is like a
just do variation breathing techniques
or if some breathing techniques apply to
one area and others to another area I do
literally one kind of breathing
I've tried wim HOF I will say yeah and
that was very interesting but I don't do
that on a regular basis because it makes
me somewhat lightheaded
so I basically just do one kind of
really simple breathing as well into the
nose out through the mouth
I try to be I try to maximize the
pleasure of each part of the breath
cycle so I do in hold exhale hold in
hold exhale hold so those four parts so
like a books breathing like a full yes
but I don't do even so that's how it
started and I found that it made me feel
out of breath all the time so I thought
let me just try to maximize the pleasure
so I'll breathe in whatever feels right
I'll hold and when I breathe in its I
would say pretty normal my whole that
the at the inhale is very short my
exhale I literally just let it out
so just goes and then my hold on the
exhale tends to be very long like 1015
seconds long and then you press a bit of
breath through attention yes because it
feels good yeah and this is currently
what I'm doing I'm doing some breath
retention some breakfast I just want to
go if the alternate nostril thing if
that has like a different effect like it
yeah for sure a like what some studies
probably not so the
that the standard that you know modern
medicine would want to make a
supposition about it have been done but
if you talk to Yogi's people have been
practicing this for years they will say
actually even which nostril you go in
through first and out will make a
difference as to whether it activates
you order it relaxes you wait so you've
got to figure this stuff out this
weekend I was at an art of breath
workshop in Santa Monica with a chap
called Brian Mackenzie you've got a book
that he's carrying up in your green room
yes unlike the show was Brian on the
dress he works at red ball almost
certainly hey well I don't know if he
works a red ball but I've followed
Brian's with just a few months now and
when I was here I saw he was putting on
a workshop so I went to the workshop by
in speed in the net stay for my podcast
and you know he talks about different
poets cause they're doing that a lot of
research into breathing and one of those
is one one two one where you breathe in
and you can and one more to want is the
rhythm so you can make that if you want
ten ten twenty ten right that's the the
protocol to use but you've got to figure
out what works for you breathing is a
huge rabbit hole right I I'm guessing
you have a lot of really highly
motivated people listening to your show
who want specific advice whites and I
guess that's where I've come from a
place of where I want to impact a lot of
people I once I don't want this to seem
unachievable I know that every single
person listening to this can do a simple
daily breathing practice that will start
to change their life so that's why I
simplify so much it's not because I
don't personally practice some things I
can get pretty obsessed with stuff very
obsessed with stuff but also when I'm
trying to communicate with the public in
books or on TV or one-on-one with
patients I try and break it right down I
want it make the might tip for getting
people to make behavior change let's
keep the boss super low start with the
boss super super low get them feeling
good about themselves
doing it regularly feeling the
difference and that will lead to them
themselves going down the breathing
rabbit hole but I just want to set them
off and just show you just what is
achievable do you know what I mean
definitely and that's the approach that
works on me
and my population so I think there are
different breeding techniques I think it
is worth having a go and so me my
mindfulness piece at the start of the
day now is no longer meditation I'm sure
it will come back to that at some stage
you know it doesn't have to be the same
3 Ms for life as you say you have rules
for when they work for you when they
don't you check them out right I'm the
same
I think these streams provide a
beautiful framework for people when
trying to design their morning routine
right I think if you cover those three
bases mindfulness movement and mindset
you are setting yourself up for a much
better day than had you not done that
now what you want to do in mindfulness
there are many options what you want to
do for your movement there are many
options what you want to do for your
mind sets what there are many options
someone else might read letting go from
David Hawkins I can't I can't stand this
book this is putting this is getting me
this is going to be pissed off first
thing in the morning that's probably not
the right book for you to read for your
mind set piece right so that's what I
like coming up with frameworks that
people can individualize and personalize
for their own lifestyle
I can't remember where we started and
how we ended a beat oh how we ended up
there was a wonderful journey but where
we started was libido so I when reading
the book the stress solution I really
liked the section on relationships I
found it in terms of somebody who wants
to make sure that they don't piss people
off I was actually pretty surprised that
like how would be the right word not
really counterintuitive but it's very
different like you were basically saying
look if you're one a touch diary I
thought that was super interesting like
how often are we being touched people
are being touched enough and then the
notion of look if you're in a
relationship and you're not having sex
that is a problem and then I know how
many people are going to start with well
I'm stressed and I don't really feel
like it you're like yo you still need to
do it and I found that interesting and
then the pushback on like telling people
it doesn't even need to be romantic you
just need to do it I was like whoa he
must get people saying some things it's
funny you say that because I know how
does much pushback as you want because
you're right I loved it I was like
is awesome so two two things I want to I
want to touch on first one is I don't
feel I could have written that
relationship section a few years ago
you know this whole theme of this whole
podcast because you're going through it
or because of the personal discovery
because the personal discovery and I
fail it was probably a little bit what
will people think right yeah right what
will people thinks I'm that is probably
the section of the book I'm proudest off
the most if I'm honest or it really
means a lot to me that someone what
yourself who I deeply respect likes that
part of book and it resonated with you
that is awesome brush by the way it was
but I means a lot to me so thank you for
sure but there are various aspects that
I think touch is important but let's
just deal with that whole sex piece what
I was trying to say is that look I'm
trying to make the case that stress is
the biggest libido killer out there and
when you intersects Monday through
Friday Monday through Friday sometimes I
don't
almost busy sort of so yeah I make
exceptions on Friday night I won't lie
okay
but usually it's more of a like almost
religious thing where I'm I'm trying to
get [__] done I don't want to derail
from your your main point but when you
talk about stress and like yeah so my
thang Monday through Friday if I'm awake
I'm either working or working out so
there because I really start my routine
Sunday night I'm a little lenient on
Friday night but yeah Monday through
Friday essentially I don't have sex as
like I will say it never happens but
it's really [__] rare I feel like I'm
betraying my objectives because that's
too big of a statement I'm gonna I'm
gonna take that back
I'm very protective of my relationship
that's first and foremost to me which is
why I resonated with the relationship
part of your book so much and I'm soup
my wife and I are super careful on the
weekends to be husband and wife to
pretend like we don't have a business as
much as we can and to connect and be
physical and all that stuff but yeah
Monday through Friday but but then what
hearing from that is you and your wife
have figured out a system that works for
you right yes - Friday you guys I don't
know what your wife does but you know
you're hitting it hard you're working
hard or you're working out you're
getting stuff done but then you have
intentionally created a part of your
week well actually you're gonna start
nourishing your relationship that is
beautiful that is exactly that is
totally consistent with what I would be
asking people to do right I think the
problem I see as a doctor is this men
women constantly coming in complaining
of low libido or not having sex
different people in the relationship
having a different perspective and a
different view on that and not just the
man wanted to have more sex and the
woman nots
go it also works the other way as well
because one of the most humbling things
dot says that people let you into their
lives they tell you things that actually
you would not otherwise generally hear
from other people right so you really
get a window into people's lives Oh God
can you give us some examples obviously
without any indication of who they came
from so I mean look there are so many
let me think yeah so look a couple comes
in and this was this this particular
couple did follow what the stereotypical
path which was the guy was very
frustrated that they were not having sex
anymore so we never have sex or do they
how old were they these guys were late
thirties okay Wow okay late thirties you
know when I'm sets anymore
the his partner his wife was having a
different viewpoint saying we do we just
you know we're busy we're tired you were
got kids to look after and the point I
try making the book and and the point I
made with this couple was look I get it
you guys have different perspectives on
this okay is it fair to say that you
both would like to have more sex
you know let's say your lifestyle did
not exist you weren't this busy the kids
weren't around all the time
would you like to now clearly it's much
better when they agree on that but yeah
this couple did agree like there was she
was like yeah I would love to but it
just doesn't
it doesn't fit in I'd rather get some
sleep I'm sorry I say to the couples
that don't agree one of them is like no
no no this is enough and it was like
well like you know although I don't see
my job as conventionally a relationship
counselor I got to tell you I think my
job as a generalist a very proud
generalist
is actually often it is cycle it's
psychology it is counseling not that I'm
trained to do that's fair right but what
do you say to these couples what's
different different let medo do you say
you should do it anyway sometimes yes um
I took about scheduled people with the
negative comments poised their fingers
yeah I can see that 450 words a minute
they're ready they're ready a psych
leaver look hear me out first so I will
not impose this on people who do not
want sets right I take a very individual
approach so it is not a global solution
just to be a sleeper sofa maybe then to
explain why is this so important why is
touch important why is sex important
like what what what does that do these
things nourishes this is a book about
living longer and healthier and there's
a whole brilliant section the quarter of
the book is on relationships because I
think it is that importance I think that
a lack of clothes nourishing
relationships is one of the biggest
stresses in our lives just not having it
not having it
no matter not a toxic relationship just
not having or not having it but be if
you do have it right and you're not
giving attention to that relationship if
you're taking that relationship for
grants Ed's I think that is incredibly
toxic on your stress levels incredibly
toxic why is it so important it's
important on multiple levels right touch
it's got touch human touch is something
we have now fought very valid reasons I
might add we have become a society that
is averse to touch rights our God talk
about a minefield yes I am like yes I'll
just say that yes well okay let's
revisit this yeah the point I'm trying
to make is we have underestimated the
value of human such how primal it is how
important it is now
we become aware of this in the last
couple of years right I shot a BBC one
documentary last year know two years ago
we were in Liverpool John Moores
University with one of the world's
leading researchers in our touch at
nerve fibre what I learned that day blew
me away and that particular chapter I
was heavily influenced by his work and
he says this human touch is not a
sentimental human indulgence it is a
biological necessity okay what why why
so he has he and many colleagues have
spent time studying something called the
C tactile afferent nerve fiber okay
let's break that down
why is that important we have two
different kinds of touch nerve fiber in
our body fast ones and slow ones it is
the same with pain so let me start by
explaining mostly the same with muscle
twitch yeah that's true I didn't think
of that
absolutely but they serve different
roles and can I go one further if the
book Thinking Fast and Slow can be
believed the same is true of the brain
there's regions of the brain that think
fast and then there's regions of the
brain that think slowly well it wouldn't
make sense because touch for example and
various different senses have to serve
different roles so I still don't
understand you're about to explain the
difference between fast and slow about
to do this yeah so let's start with pain
we're going to touch let's just start
with pain for a second because I think
it's a easy way to get our head around
it you are in the kitchen right you are
boiling something and the pan is super
hot right what happens instantaneously
in a millisecond you put your hand away
right that is because that pain signal
has been transmitted along the fast
nerve fiber to your brain and has told
you where you been touched this is a
problem move it away a few seconds later
is when the emotional quality of that
pain you might feel tearful exactly I
noticed this with my kids you pull your
hand you're like oh yeah
my daughter when she was four she fell
over in the back garden right now on the
paving she falls over onto her knee what
does she do immediately she just looks a
bit of a muse
she's rubbing her knee she is not crying
right about three to four seconds later
the coin kicks in that is the slow
signal saying which carries the
emotional quality to that pain right so
far so quick
yep right let's move it to touch so
touch also has these two different nerve
fibers so one of those nerve fibers the
first one tells you geographically where
you are being touched okay
you know I touch you now you know I've
touched you that right but you say oh he
has touched me on my hand why is he done
that okay there is also on our skin
these see tactile afferent CT afferent
nerve fibers which are optimally
stimulated when you stroke them at three
to five centimeters per second now now
this is this is mad uh-huh when you are
stroking your wife right you do not have
a tracking device there there was an
awkward pause right there okay when
you're hugging it when you're watching a
TV show and you're just rubbing her on
let's say okay let's say when your
friend is stroking their other half
right
you're not actually calculating am I
doing this a 3/4 centimeters per second
right but when mothers are watched in a
research setting stroking their children
they all automatically lock into that
speed that's so [__] weird it is
innate it is within us why because those
nerve fibers are optimally stimulated at
that point so the next question is where
do those nerve fibers get those nerve
fibers go all the way up to our brain
but to the emotional part of our brain
the most primitive part of our brain and
what do they do there they serve an
emotional role in our body they help to
lower the stress hormone cortisol they
increase levels of the hormone oxytocin
it lowers your heart rates when these
nerve fibers are stimulated it lowers
your blood pressure natural killer cells
these are the part of your immune system
that help fight off things like viruses
and colds those go up significantly when
the slow touch nerve fiber
get stimulates can I tell you something
please literally last night so my wife
is traveling
yeah so last night was gonna be our last
night together for I don't know like
five nights or something and and we do
this quite frequently but if we need to
reconnect
she just Pat's her lap which means for
me to take my shirt off lay my head down
and then she just strokes my back dude I
would freak out if she is doing it at
that thing sort of on that tempo
unknowingly that's really interesting I
would say she is I would bet that she is
because we're all human we're all wired
bet there's a certain commonality in the
way we're wired this is just something
that is inbuilt the point I'm trying to
make is that we have undervalued touch
when we talk about senses you know you
might say you know vision or hearing
which one would you rather lose you know
maybe it may be taste and smell we'll
get a looking at what does touch come
like we don't think about touch and I
think what he says human touch is not a
sentimental human indulgence of
biological necessity when you read the
research it blows you away but check
this out Tom right a few years ago we're
in America right in the NBA the teams
who touched themselves more at the start
of the season each other each other with
the teams who ended up higher get out no
no look I am NOT trying to say there
were no other components there okay like
just to be super clear sure sure but it
is interesting if a waiter or a waitress
hands you the check right and they tap
you on your shoulder you will tip more
that has been shown in multiple research
settings right the point I'm trying to
make is human touch is an important it
is a fundamental part of who we are and
interesting enough right when your wife
strokes you like that
hey I bet she's doing it at that pace
right but B she is also getting a
benefits
so these C tarts out afferents most of
them on our body and this is gonna freak
you out
I want our shoulder and upper band
that's exactly yes literally that's my
spot right so professor magloan talks
about this and he explains that what
that is so weird why there why why that
why would we have such an important
concentration of these nerve fibers on a
place that we would find hard
access our saris why we're social beings
were meant to be with other people
evolution had put it there so that
actually it brings us together and the
giver off touch also experiences a
benefit so it's not just you who's
having your CT afferent nerve fiber
stimulated right it's not just you who's
getting that and you're getting the
benefit
she is also getting the benefit as well
so on an eeveelution well it's just
super super interesting why we have such
a high concentration on our back and
when me and francis McGlone talked about
this we hypothesize that it is you know
it's because we are these social beings
we are meant to be together
it helps connects as when were with
someone else and we do this it Bond's us
hey you can do I don't own a pets but
I've spoken to since this book came out
in the UK a lot of people have asked me
what about when you're stroking a pet
and it appears the same thing happens
when you stroke your pets not only is
your pets getting a benefit you are also
getting a benefit as well so touch is
important what is the intervention I
recommend I say keep a touch diary said
write down how many times you are having
appropriate writes appropriate
affectionate human touch and I say look
after write down in one week how many
times see if the next what you can
double it you know and then see the week
at home and this is a very powerful
important and dangerous topic I'll just
keep with the appropriate thing but I
will tell you a story so I went out on a
business meeting but it was like out and
about it had to do with film and the
woman that took me out touched me no
joke 20 times more than the average
person would touch you it was so like it
so caught my attention that I would I
think at one point I actually laughed
out loud because it was like touching my
shoulder touching my arm she would you
know touch forearm hand shoulder by it
was like hilarious and I was like and
yet it's working I couldn't believe how
disarming it was I was like this is so
weird like she's making me feel disarmed
and
relaxed and it was super bizarre and I
thought is she doing this on purpose or
she like optimized for something
unknowingly it was really interesting
and it was so outside the norm because
you're right people do not do that but I
couldn't leave even though I was hyper
aware of it I was like it still has this
really weird
calming is the right bonding effect this
is super bizarre and it's weird because
it's become so it's become almost
socially unacceptable to do that Oh dad
the whole time I'm like does she know
you can't do this like a touch people
like this yeah like ten years ago in my
consultation room if I was delivering
bad news to someone right I would
probably sit close low in my turn I may
well put my hand on their back you know
to deliver in a very caring and
compassionate way I rarely do that these
days I am scared I'm like maybe not even
consciously I'm just a way that this is
not appropriate you know be very careful
you know hey I am saying that in this
quest to keep us safe which I totally
get and I supports rights I am just
raising the question have there been
unintended consequences have we
underestimated search I think for guys
this is a huge problem you know since I
dive into this research I heard my buddy
small right when I meet them now instead
of that you know that high five or a
handshake you know what often now I give
them a hug right not in a weird way but
and it feels good and you notice a
response from it I talked about
something in the book which I think
you'll like called the 3d greeting right
and I it's the pits and the piece on
intimacy it's an assault on Turks voice
and touch yeah
greets your partner or greet someone
close to you in three dimensions as you
say you know eyes voice and touch I
actually genuinely do this with my wife
in the morning for fifteen second oh do
you guys do the staring at each other
for five minutes saying oh we did it
once man I was like oh I don't know if I
have you tried it no man please I beg
you to try it so weird yeah I mean this
was Anna I was at an event and you know
it was in it was
doctors actually and you know one of the
sessions was about I think it's about
breathing or meditation and it was an
exercise you know that we were to
participate in so we had to find a seat
sit opposite someone who we didn't know
right randomly mm-hmm and then you had
to go through this process that I do
describe in the book that with the knees
touching and everything yeah with it so
this was a girl rights who I didn't know
and we sat together knees touching and
then we have to look into each other's
eyes for five minutes without looking
away man it is so deeply uncomfortable
yes right and what struck me at the end
was oh my god I have just spent five
years five minutes looking into another
woman's eyes I don't think I've ever
ever done that with my own wife right so
for me it was like it was really it was
really an educational and one love I
thought this is mad I've just done that
but what's really weird is when you do
it it starts off feeling uncomfortable
people are trying to look away but you
sort of get in sweat and you you can
pick up so much you can look you know it
feels so you're looking deep into
someone's soul right you said we're
these sorts of pickup things again that
was a learning experience for me I
thought wow I should do that when my
wife and we have done it mmm but only
one only once but now has it's weird you
know what
just cuz life gets busy and we're you
know I'm not thought about it again so
I'm gonna make a commitment to you on
air now Tom time we're gonna go back
when I fly back on Friday night I'm
going to do this with my wife I am
because I want to actually I would love
to actually redo it after I do with Lisa
as well then yeah text me I'll text you
guys because I think it's a it's really
insightful I'm not saying this is not
something I'm recommending people do day
in day out
what I am recommending people think
about doing is the 3d greeting many
people listening to this will be so busy
in the morning so I'll be rushing around
trying to get out for work if they've
got kids try to get them off
you are like passing ships with your
other half quite often this has changed
and transformed my relationship 15
seconds in the morning where we'll hug I
will look her in the eyes I was
say something nice she will say
something nice to me and you know the
mad thing Tom since the book came out so
many people send me a DM on Instagram
they say does Jesse you know that a 3d
greeting thing like I've been trying it
and it's making a huge difference one
lady and not just one many people have
said this to me but one lady in
particular said I've been trying this
with my husband he doesn't know that I'm
doing it right and it is changing
everything he's happier he's calmer
he's more present with the kids is that
so bananas yeah this really simple [__]
that makes such a big difference to just
hug your partner look them in the eye
say something nice touch it's crazy the
science is that we know intuitively
we're just missing the big picture we're
getting sidetracked down the route of
what is this tech gonna tell us right I
cannot unsee that I'm just saying let's
not forget about the basics how often
should people have sex yeah you know
give me some ideals here I would say in
a relationship yeah yeah I'm talking
with a significant other yeah you should
be doing it at a time I think you should
probably have that conversation with
each other and actually not lead this
thing to be that thing at it you don't
really talk about that you actually
haven't opened up front conversation the
GU you know in a couple one-one-one half
says how much they would ideally like
the other half says what they would
ideally like if there is a big
discrepancy agree on a compromise I
wasn't at a bioloid the biological
necessity let me come to that because I
think this is super-important sonica
right it is simply and this is the point
I was trying to make about people should
schedule sex I was trying to make the
point I use this tip with many of my
patients and actually it brings the
romance and intimacy back into their
relationship they are too stressed to
have sex they don't feel like it I'm
saying would you consider for four weeks
putting it in the diary as you would
diary in anything else in your schedule
more often than not they will come back
a few weeks later not always and there's
often other other issues to deal with
more often than not people will come
back and say the act of putting it in
the diary the acts of prioritizing it
the act of prioritizing that other
half actually has led to more connection
has led to more intimacy has often led
to them having more sex so I think not
having any sex not having intimacy leads
that becomes the the self-fulfilling
prophecy and what I was trying to say
and it feels very apt to say this
because I'm now here in you know we're
in Beverly Hills I think yeah you know
and I you know I've been in Hollywood
this morning I say the movies have given
us have sold us this artificial idea of
what our relationship is that it's about
the prince and princesses that actually
you know what we can only be intimate
with our parts when everything is
perfect when the lighting is right when
the candles are there when we feel
chilled out that is not real life right
real life is busy we life is hard I am
all for romance but I think and I have
seen this this is where this comes from
from me I am giving you my experience my
clinical experience as a doctor I'm
looking at the science but I'm also
marrying it with what I've seen in real
life and I think for many people they
are simply not prioritizing it they are
not scheduling it they know the curvy
contours off their iPhone more than they
know the curvy contours of their partner
rights and I think there's something in
that and I guess some of those words are
quite provocative in the book but I
haven't had that much pushback I think
people all recognize that this is an
issue in terms of the answer you would
like to know how often on a biological
level should people be having sex
honestly I don't know but I would
speculate twice a week okay if I don't
like being pushed on exacts but you like
pushing me so I'm gonna say twice a week
is there such thing as too much you
asking for a friend
I'm asking for yeah of course assuming
no friction burns or anything like that
like is there a point at which you are
now diminishing returns
I think there probably is yeah I think
with with anything there is just a
biological level I am NOT an expert on
that so I don't want to proclaim to be I
think it's got to be the right amount in
the concepts of the rest of your life
it's got to leave you feeling energized
it's got to help you feel closer more
intimate more connected it should have a
knock-on effect on other aspects of your
life
if it doesn't of course there could be
other factors there but I think that's
what people should be looking for not
just that act off having sex is what
else is going on does it change the
fabric does it change the texture of
your relationship and I would say people
give it a go you know if I don't know if
your audience is predominately male or
female do you know it's about 60/40 okay
pretty evenly so you know people are
listening to this maybe you know ask
your other half to listen to this part
or read that section of the book and
maybe come up with an agreements and
just try I would I would make the
contention that we experiment in all
aspects of our life we try a certain
workout for a few days see if it agrees
with us we tried diet for a little while
see do we feel good on this if you are
dissatisfied with the intimacy in your
relationship rights if you feel you
would like to connect more with your
other half try the three degree thing
for seven days try that for 15 seconds a
day I get her and see you will feel the
difference and if you feel that you're
not having enough sex a try the three
degrees because I think that will help
connect you put it in the diary like
your gym session like the meeting you
have with your boss like the kids party
you've got to take your four-year-old
son suit puts intimacy in the diary now
I do clarify in the book I'm talking
about scheduling intimacy it does not
have to mean sex every time it could be
you know I don't know take a shower with
your partner right and you may ask me
Tom why is it then in 2019 we have a
doctor having to say stuff like this
right that would be a great question
yeah but there what else he is I am
responding to the things that I see in
my clinic these are the problems that
people are suffering with today
therefore I want to give people tools
that work that are accessible that are
absolutely practical for them to do that
work for the complaints that people come
to see me with today maybe 20-30 years
ago you wouldn't need a doctor telling
you this stuff but even what how old is
all this modern tech how old are
smartphones 10 10 years what was the
first iPhone
twelve years came out in 2007 I think
2007 twelve years ago before that time I
think intimacy was much less of an issue
right I really think technology for all
this benefit he's some stats in the book
that were a little chilling in terms of
how much less sex we're having now which
is crazy it is crazy and there were
different stats saying different things
rights but just imagine this I think we
can I think many of us will resonate
with this this whole idea that we are
physically in the same location with our
partners but mentally we're not on the
same place you're in the same room okay
you're in the same bed you're lying on
one half partner on the other half you
are physically a few centimeters away
from each other but in your heads you
can be millions of miles away we're not
personalized worlds we've got our own
emails we've got our own social media
feeds we've got our own
Netflix is feeding us exactly what we
want actually it is very hard for a
fellow human being to compete with what
an algorithm is feeding you to your own
desires this is having consequences
because what if the reason we're not
having as much sex as before is simply
because we're not allowing those
opportunities to develop let's say pre
technology what are two people doing in
bed they can't go on your email right
the can't go on social media they might
read a book they might talk they might
have a conversation they might hunt hug
and that might lead to intimacy of some
sort I don't mean always sex it might
just lead to more intimacy it is almost
like a cliche now that we're again on
reflection I have said some quite
controversial things in the book you
know as I say we're all having AI
affairs with our partners with our
phones you know and I think if people
sit and reflect on that you know I think
it's an issue and simply intentionally
removing the phone from the bedroom for
example not only will I think that help
your sleep will help you lower your
stress levels if you are lucky enough to
have a long-term partner right if that
is what you want and you do have a
long-term partner
I genuinely believe it will transform
your relationship not over weeks within
days magical [__] man good place to tap
out thank you brother
that was incredible good to have you
back on the show love the book the
stress solution check it out it for
nothing else you got to read that
section on relationships fantastic
but thank you man for being here thanks
for having me on something that somebody
definitely everybody listening thank you
for joining us we'll see you next time
and until then be legendary take care of
my friends peace that was deep for
people who are struggling with their
diets and they're struggling with what
to eat obviously why don't you focus on
when you eat when you eat is arguably as
important or certainly of critical
importance as well as what you eats